2. Simile of the wishing jewelIt is like a priceless jewel which has the property of preventing men and ghosts from enter
ing the place where it is put.If someone were possessed by a ghost, one would only have to introduce this jewel, and tha
t ghost would depart.If someone were oppressed by the wind, and would apply this jewel when his body is inflated,he woul
d hold back that wind, would prevent it from getting worse, would appease it.It would have a similar effect when applied
to a body burning with bile,choked with phlegm,or painful as a result of a disease arising from a disorder of the humou
rs.(97) It would illuminate the blackest darkness of night.In the heat it would cool the spot of earth where it is place
d.In the cold it would warm it.Its presence drives vipers and other noxious animals from districts which they have infes
ted.If a woman or man were bitten by a viper, one need only show them that jewel; and its sight will counteract that poi
son, and make it depart.Such are the qualities of this jewel.If one had a boil in the eye, or clouded eyesight, or a dis
ease in the eye, or a cataract, one need only place that jewel on the eyes, and its mere presence will remove and appeas
e those afflictions.Such are its qualities.Placed in water, it dyes the water all through with its own colour.Wrapped in
a white cloth, and thrown into water, it makes the water white.Equally, when wrapped or bound in a black-blue, or yello
w, or red, or crimson cloth, or into cloth of any other colour, it would dye that water into which it were thrown with t
he colour of the cloth.It would also clear up any turbidity there might be in the water.Endowed with such qualities woul
d that jewel be.

(98) Ananda: Do these jewels, Kausika, belong to the world of the Gods, or to the men of Jambudvipa? Sakra: They are foun
d among the Gods.The jewels found among the men of Jambudvipa, on the other hand,are rather coarse and small, and not en
dowed with such qualities.They are infinitely inferior to those heavenly jewels.But those among the Gods are fine and fu
ll of all possible qualities.If that jewel were now put into a basket, or placed upon it, then that basket would still b
e desirable after the jewel had again been taken out.The basket, through the qualities of the jewel, would become an obj
ect of supreme longing.In the same way, O Lord, the qualities of the cognition of the all-knowing are derived from the p
erfection of wisdom.On account of it the relics of the Tathagata who has gone to Parinirvana are worshipped. For they ar
e the true repositories of the cognition of the all-knowing.And as the demonstration of dharma by the Buddhas and Lords 
in all world systems should be worshipped because it has come forth from the perfection of wisdom, so also the dharma-pr
eacherâ€™s demonstration of dharma.As a king should be worshipped, because his royal might gives courage to a great body o
f people, (99) so also the preacher of dharma, because, through the might of the Dharma-body, he gives courage to a grea
t body of people.But the relics of the Tathagata are worshipped for the same reason that one worships the demonstration 
of dharma, and the preacher of dharma.

