3. Dharmodgata’s demonstration of dharmaAfter the lapse of seven years the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata emerged from his tranc
e, went up to the seat spread out for him, sat down on it, and, surrounded and attended by an assembly of many hundreds 
of thousands, he demonstrated dharma.

The moment the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita (525) saw the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata, he was filled with that kind of happiness
which a monk feels when, with one-pointed attention, he has obtained the first trance.And this is the demonstration of 
the perfection of wisdom by the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata: “The perfection of wisdom is self-identical, because all dharma
s are the same.Perfect wisdom is isolated because all dharmas are isolated.Perfect wisdom is immobile because all dharma
s are immobile.Perfect wisdom is devoid of mental acts because all dharmas are devoid of mental acts.Perfect wisdom is u
nbenumbed, because all dharmas are unbenumbed.Perfect wisdom has but one single taste because all dharmas have one and t
he same taste.Perfect wisdom is boundless because all dharmas are boundless.Perfect wisdom is non-production because all
dharmas are non-production.Perfect wisdom is non-stopping because all dharmas are not stopped.As the firmament is bound
less, so is perfect wisdom.As the ocean is boundless, so is perfect wisdom.As Meru shines in multicoloured brilliance, s
o does the perfection of wisdom.As the firmament is not fashioned, so is perfect wisdom not fashioned.Perfect wisdom is 
boundless, because form, and the other skandhas are boundless.Perfect wisdom is boundless because the element of earth, 
and the other elements, are boundless.Perfect wisdom is self-identical, because the adamantine dharma is self-identical.
Perfect wisdom is undifferentiated because all dharmas are undifferentiated.The non-apprehension of perfect wisdom follo
ws from the non-apprehension of all dharmas.Perfect wisdom remains the same whatever it may surpass because all dharmas 
remain the same whatever they may surpass.(526) Perfect wisdom is powerless to act because all dharmas are powerless to 
act.Perfect wisdom is unthinkable because all dharmas are unthinkable.”

Thereupon on that occasion there was born in the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita the king of concentrations called “the samenes
s of all dharmas,”and, consequent on that, the concentrations called “isolation of all dharmas,” “immobility of all dhar
mas,” “absence of all mental acts in all dharmas,” “lack of numbness in all dharmas,” “the one taste of all dharmas,” “t
he boundlessness of all dharmas,” "the non-production of all dharmas," "the non-stopping of all dharmas," “boundless lik
e the firmament,” “boundless like the ocean,” “brilliant and multicoloured like Meru,” “not fashioned, like the firmamen
t,” “boundless like form, etc.,” “boundless like the element of earth, etc.,” “adamantine,” “non-differentiatedness of a
ll dharmas,” “non-apprehension of all dharmas,” “sameness of all dharmas whatever they may surpass,” “all dharmas are po
werless to act,” “all dharmas are unthinkable.”Beginning with these, the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita acquired six million 
concentration doors.

Chapter XXXII Entrusting

