6. AttainmentSubhuti: Through the Buddha’s might, O Lord.Moreover, O Lord, a Bodhisattva [who sets out on his journey] do
es not approach [the goal of full Bodhisattvahood] from where it begins, nor where it ends, nor in the middle either.Bec
ause a Bodhisattva is as boundless as form, etc., is boundless.He does not approach the idea that ‘a Bodhisattva is form
,’ etc.That also does not exist, and is not apprehended.Thus in each and every way I do not get at any of the dharmas wh
ich constitute a Bodhisattva. I do not see that dharma which the word ‘Bodhisattva’ denotes.Perfect wisdom also I neithe
r see nor get at.All-knowledge also I neither see nor get at.Since in each and every way I neither apprehend nor see tha
t dharma, - what dharma should I instruct and admonish through what dharma in what dharma? ‘Buddha,’ Bodhisattva,’ ‘perf
ect wisdom,’ all these are mere words.And what they denote is something uncreated.It is as with the self.(26) Although w
e speak of a ‘self,’ yet absolutely the self is something uncreated. Since therefore all dharmas are without own-being, 
what is that form, etc., which cannot be seized, and which is something uncreated? Thus the fact that all dharmas are wi
thout own-being is the same as the fact that they are uncreated.But the non-creation of all dharmas differs from those d
harmas [themselves].How shall I instruct and admonish a non-creation in a perfect wisdom which is also a non-creation? A
nd yet, one cannot apprehend as other than uncreated all the dharmas, be they those which constitute a Buddha, or a Bodh
isattva, or him who marches to enlightenment.If a Bodhisattva, when this is being taught, is not afraid, then one should
know that ‘this Bodhisattva, this great being, courses in perfect wisdom, develops it, investigates it, and meditates o
n it.’Because at the time a Bodhisattva investigates these dharmas in perfect wisdom, at that time he does not approach 
form, etc., nor go to it. Nor does he review the production of form, etc., nor its stopping.For the non-production of fo
rm, etc., is not form, etc.(27) The non-passing-away of form, etc., is not form, etc.Non-production and form are therefo
re not two, nor divided. Not-passing-away and form, etc., are therefore not two, nor divided.Inasmuch as one calls it ‘f
orm,’ etc., one makes a count of what is not two.Thus the Bodhisattva investigates in perfect wisdom all dharmas in all 
their modes, and at that time he does (28) not approach form, etc.

Sariputra: As I understand the teaching of the Venerable Subhuti, a Bodhisattva also is a non-production.But if a Bodhisa
ttva is a non-production, how then does he go on the difficult pilgrimage, and how can he possibly endure the experience
of those sufferings [which he is said to undergo] for the sake of beings? Subhuti: I do not look for a Bodhisattva who 
goes on the difficult pilgrimage. In any case, one who courses in the perception of difficulties is not a Bodhisattva.Be
cause one who has generated a perception of difficulties is unable to work the weal of countless beings.On the contrary,
he forms the notion of ease,he forms the notion that all beings, whether men or women, are his parents and children,and
thus he goes on the pilgrimage of a Bodhisattva.A Bodhisattva should therefore identify all beings with his parents or 
children, yes, even with his own self,like this: ‘As I myself want to be quite free from all sufferings, just so all bei
ngs want to be quite free from all sufferings.’In addition with regard to all beings one should form the notion: ‘I ough
t not to desert all these beings.I ought to set them free from the quite measureless heap of sufferings!And I should not
produce towards them a thought of hate, even though I might be dismembered a hundred times!’It is thus that a Bodhisatt
va should lift up his heart. When he dwells as one whose heart is such, then he will neither course nor dwell as one who
perceives difficulties.(29) And further a Bodhisattva should produce the thought that ‘as in each and every way a self 
does not exist, and is not got at, so in each and every way all dharmas do not exist, and are not got at.’He should appl
y this notion to all dharmas, inside and outside.When he dwells as one whose heart is such, then he will neither course,
nor dwell, as one who perceives difficulties.But when the Venerable Sariputra said that ‘a non-production is the Bodhis
attva,’indeed, it is so,‘a non-production is the Bodhisattva.’

Sariputra: Further, is just a Bodhisattva a non-production, or the dharmas also which constitute him? Subhuti: The dharma
s which constitute a Bodhisattva are also a non-production. Sariputra: Are just the dharmas which constitute a Bodhisatt
va a non-production, or also the state of all-knowledge? Subhuti: The state of all-knowledge is also a non-production.Sa
riputra: Is just the state of all-knowledge a non-production, or also the dharmas which constitute it? Subhuti: The dhar
mas which constitute all-knowledge are also a non-production.Sariputra: Are just the dharmas which constitute all-knowle
dge a non-production, or also the common people? Subhuti: The common people are also a non-production.Sariputra: Are jus
t the common people a non-production, or also the dharmas which constitute them? Subhuti: The dharmas which constitute t
he common people are also a non-production.(30) Sariputra: If, venerable Subhuti, the Bodhisattva is a non-production an
d also the dharmas which constitute him, and also the state of all-knowledge, and also the dharmas which constitute it, 
and also the common people, and also the dharmas which constitute them, - then, surely, the state of all-knowledge is re
ached by a Bodhisattva without any exertion?Subhuti: I do not wish for the attainment of an unproduced dharma, nor for r
eunion with one.Further, does one attain an unproduced attainment through an unproduced dharma? Sariputra: Is then an un
produced attainment attained through an unproduced dharma, or through a produced dharma? Subhuti: Is then an unproduced 
dharma produced, or is it unproduced? Sariputra: Is then production a dharma which is a non-production, or is non-produc
tion a dharma which is production? Subhuti: To talk of a production-dharma as a non-production-dharma is not intelligibl
e.Sariputra: To talk of non-production is also not intelligible.Subhuti: Non-production is just talk.Non-production just
appears before the mind’s eye.Non-production is just a flash in the mind.Absolutely it is nothing more than that.

Sariputra: In the first rank of the preachers of dharma should the Venerable Subhuti be placed.(31) For in whatever way h
e may be questioned, he finds a way out; he does not swerve from [the correct teaching about] the true nature of Dharma,
and he does not contradict that true nature of Dharma.Subhuti: This is the Lord’s Absolute, the essence of the Disciple
s who are without any support,so that, in whatever way they are questioned, they find a way out, do not contradict the t
rue nature of dharmas, nor depart from it.And that because they do not rely on any dharmas.Sariputra: Well said, Subhuti
.And what is that perfection of the Bodhisattvas which [allows them not to] lean on any dharmas? Subhuti: The perfection
of wisdom, beneficial to all the [three] vehicles, is also the perfection which [allows them not to] lean on any dharma
, because [it shows that] all dharmas have no support [and can therefore give none].For if a Bodhisattva, when this deep
perfection of wisdom is being taught, remains unafraid, then one should know that he has adjusted himself to the perfec
tion of wisdom, and that he is not lacking in this attention [to the true facts about dharmas].

Sariputra: How is it that a Bodhisattva does not lack in attention when he is adjusted to perfect wisdom? (32) For if a B
odhisattva is not lacking in attention, then he should [automatically] lack in adjustment to the perfection of wisdom.An
d if he does not lack in adjustment to the perfection of wisdom, then he would be lacking in attention.But if [in] a Bod
hisattva the two facts that he is not lacking in attention, and that he is not lacking in dwelling in the perfection of 
wisdom, belong together,then all beings also will not be lacking in dwelling in the perfection of wisdom.Because they al
so dwell not lacking in attention.

Subhuti: Well said,and yet I must reprove you,although the Venerable Sariputra has taken hold of the matter correctly as 
far as the words are concerned.Because one should know that attention is without own-being in the same way in which bein
gs are without own-being;that attention has no real existence in the same way in which beings have no real existence;tha
t attention is isolated in the same way in which beings are isolated;that attention is unthinkable in the same way in wh
ich beings are unthinkable;that acts of mental attention do not undergo the process which leads to enlightenment in the 
same way in which beings do not undergo that process;that acts of attention do not in any real sense undergo the process
which leads to enlightenment, any more than beings do.It is through an attention of such a character that I wish that a
Bodhisattva, a great being, may dwell in this dwelling.

Chapter II Sakra

