2. Mara’s deedsFurthermore, Mara, the Evil One, conjures up a vision of the eight great hells, with many hundreds, many t
housands, many hundreds of thousands of Bodhisattvas in them, and he says to the irreversible Bodhisattva: “Those Bodhis
attvas, described by the Tathagata as irreversible, have been reborn in the great hells.Just so you also, since you have
been described as irreversible, will fall into the great hells.Confess that that thought of enlightenment was an error!
Abandon it!What is Buddhahood to you? In that way you will avoid rebirth in the hells.If you act thus you will be one w
ho goes to heaven.”If even then the mind of the Bodhisattva does not waver, is not put out, if he is certain in his know
ledge that an irreversible Bodhisattva cannot possibly be reborn against his will in the hells,then this is another toke
n of his irreversibility.

Furthermore, Mara, the Evil One, may come along in the guise of a Shramana, and say: “Give up what you have heard up to n
ow, abandon what you have gained so far!And if you follow this advice, we will again and again approach you, and say to 
you:‘What you have heard just now, that is not the word of the Buddha.It is poetry, the work of poets.But what I here te
ach to you, that is the teaching of the Buddha, that is the word of the Buddha.’”If, on hearing that, a Bodhisattva wave
rs and is put out, then one should know that he has not been predicted by the Tathagata,that he is not fixed on full enl
ightenment,(329) that he does not stand firmly in the element of irreversibility.But if, even when he has heard these wo
rds of Mara, he does not waver, but flees back to the nature of dharma, to Non-production, to Non-stopping, to the Uneff
ected, then he is not one of those who put their trust in others.An Arhat, a monk whose outflows are dried up, does not 
go by someone else whom he puts his trust in, but he has placed the nature of dharma directly before his own eyes,and Ma
ra has no access to him.Just so an irreversible Bodhisattva cannot be crushed by persons who belong to the vehicle of th
e Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas,he cannot, by his very nature, backslide into the level of Disciple or Pratyekabuddha, h
e is fixed on all-knowledge, and ends up in perfect enlightenment.It is quite certain that a Bodhisattva who stands firm
ly in the element of irreversibility cannot possibly be led astray by others.

Furthermore, someone will come to the irreversible Bodhisattva and say: “A journey in birth-and-death is this coursing in
perfect wisdom, and not the journey of someone who is in quest of enlightenment.Put and end to all suffering in this ve
ry life!You will then no longer experience all the sufferings and disappointments which are bound up with the plane of b
irth-and-death.Aye surely, in this very life already will this personality of yours be finished, why do you think of tak
ing upon yourself another one [for the sake of other beings]?”If even then the Bodhisattva neither wavers nor is put out
, then Mara himself will say to him: “Just have a look at those Bodhisattvas who for countless aeons have presented the 
necessities of life (330) to the Buddhas, the Lords, who have led holy lives in the presence of countless Buddhas, who h
ave honoured countless Buddhas and Lords, have questioned them about just this vehicle of the Bodhisattvas, have asked t
hem how a Bodhisattva should stand, have heard the answer of the Tathagatas, and have acted on it!In spite of the fact t
hat they have stood, coursed and exerted themselves as they should, - to this very day they have not yet known full enli
ghtenment!They stand firm in their instructions, they train themselves as they should, - but they have not reached all-k
nowledge!How then will you reach full enlightenment ever?” If even then he does not waver and is not put out, then Mara,
the Evil One, will conjure up some monks in that place, and say: “Those monks have become Arhats, with their outflows d
ried up. They who have set out for enlightenment, in the meantime have reached Arhatship, and become established in it.H
ow will you ever reach full enlightenment?” It is quite certain that a Bodhisattva must be irreversible from full enligh
tenment if, when this is being said and expounded, his mind does not waver and is not put out.If the mind of a Bodhisatt
va who has heard from a stranger these discouraging remarks is not excluded from the true nature of dharma, if he does n
ot go back on it, if he does not change his mind, if he recognizes those deeds of Mara for what they are, then it is qui
te impossible that he who courses correctly in the perfections should not reach all-knowledge. Mara, the Evil One, canno
t possibly gain entry to a Bodhisattva who not only courses but also trains himself correctly, who does not lack in the 
practices described by the Tathagatas, who is completely adjusted to this mental activity which is associated with the p
erfections.(331) If a Bodhisattva recognizes the deeds of Mara, if, when he hears discouraging remarks from strangers, h
e does not desist, nor slide back, nor change his mind, if he perceives those deeds of Mara for what they are,then this 
is another token of irreversibility.

Furthermore, an irreversible Bodhisattva does not piece together a perception of form, etc., nor produce one.For the irre
versible Bodhisattva who has through dharmas which are empty of their own marks definitely entered on the certainty that
he will win salvation as a Bodhisattvadoes not apprehend even that dharma, and so he cannot piece it together, or produ
ce it.One says therefore that “a Bodhisattva is irreversible if he patiently accepts the cognition of non-production.”Th
is is another token of irreversibility.

Furthermore, Mara, the Evil One, comes along in the guise of a monk and tries to deter the Bodhisattva with the words: “T
he same as space is this all-knowledge.It is a dharma which is not,it is non-existent.Who can anoint himself for it, who
fully know it? There is no one who could go forth to it, there is no one who could fully know it, nothing that should b
e fully known, there is no one who would understand, there is nothing that should be understood.At all times those dharm
as are the same as space,it is useless for you to resist,revealed as a deed of Mara is this doctrine that ‘one should kn
ow full enlightenment,’ it is not the Buddha’s teaching.”A son or daughter of good family should then cognize, realize a
nd know that (332) this kind of critical examination is just a deed of Mara.After he has made this reflection, he should
make his mind firm, unshakeable, irrestible.This is another token of irreversibility.

