5. Further advantages from perfect wisdomSakra: So far the Tathagata has not proclaimed all the qualities of the perfecti
on of wisdom, qualities which one acquires by learning, studying and repeating the perfection of wisdom.For how else cou
ld the limited amount of the perfection of wisdom, which I had learned from the Lord, have spread [when just now the her
etics and Mara were turned away]! TheLord: So it is, Kausika.Moreover, not only one who has learned, studied and repeate
d the perfection of wisdom, will have those qualities,but also one who worships a copy of it,he also, I teach, will have
those advantages here and now.

(83) Sakra: I also will protect one who worships a copy of the perfection of wisdom, and still more so one who in additio
n learns, studies and repeats it.

The Lord: Well said, Kausika.Moreover, when someone repeats this perfection of wisdom, many hundreds of Gods will come ne
ar,many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of Gods, so as to listen to the dharma.And, when they hear the dharma, tho
se Gods will want to induce a readiness to speak in that preacher of dharma.Even when he is not willing to talk, the God
s still expect that, through their respect for dharma, a readiness to speak will be induced in him, and that he will fee
l urged to teach.(84) This again is another quality which someone acquires just here and now when learning, studying, an
d repeating the perfection of wisdom.

Moreover, the minds of those who teach this perfection of wisdom will remain uncowed in front of the four assemblies. The
y will have no fear of being plied with questions by hostile persons.For the perfection of wisdom protects them.Immersed
in the perfection of wisdom one does not see the hostility, nor those who act with hostility, nor those who want to be 
hostile.In that way, upheld by the perfection of wisdom, one remains unaffected by censure and fear.These qualities also
someone acquires just here and now when learning, studying and repeating the perfection of wisdom.

In addition, he will be dear to his mother and father, to friends, relatives and kinsmen, to Sramanas and Brahmanas. Comp
etent he will be and capable of refuting, in accordance with dharma, any counter-arguments that may arise, and able to d
eal with counter-questions.These qualities also someone acquires just here and now when learning, studying and repeating
the perfection of wisdom.

(85) Moreover, Kausika, among the Gods of the Four Great Kings those Gods who have set out for full enlightenment will ma
ke up their minds to come to the place where someone has put up a copy of the perfection of wisdom, and worships it.They
will come, look upon the copy of this perfection of wisdom, salute it respectfully, pay homage to it, learn, study and 
repeat it.Then they will depart again.And that applies to all the Gods, up to the Highest of Gods.(88) And that son or d
aughter of a good family should wish that the Gods, Nagas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, me
n and ghosts, in the ten directions in countless world systems, should, with the help of this book, see the perfection o
f wisdom, salute it respectfully, pay homage to it, learn, study and repeat it;that then they should return to their res
pective worlds; and that he should be able to give them just this gift of dharma.You should not however think, Kausika, 
that only in this four-continent world the Gods of the realm of sense-desire and of the realm of form, who have set out 
for full enlightenment, will decide to come to that place.Not so, Kausika, should you view it!No, all the Gods in the gr
eat trichiliocosm, who have set out for full enlightenment, will decide to come to that place.They will come, look upon 
the copy of this perfection of wisdom, salute it respectfully, pay homage to it, learn, study and repeat it.Moreover, th
e house, room or palace of the devotee of the perfection of wisdom will be well guarded.No one will harm him, except as 
a punishment for past deeds.This is another quality which one acquires just here and now. (89) For very powerful Gods, a
nd other supernatural beings, will decide to come to that place.

Sakra: How does one know that Gods, or other supernatural beings, have come to that place to hear, etc., the perfection o
f wisdom? The Lord: When one perceives somewhere a sublime radiance or smells a superhuman odour not smelled before, the
n one should know for certain that a God, or other supernatural being, has come, has come near.

Further, clean and pure habits will attract those Gods, etc.,and will make them enraptured, overjoyed, full of zest and g
ladness.But the divinities of minor power, who had before occupied that place, they will decide to leave it.For they can
not endure the splendour, majesty and dignity of those very powerful Gods, etc.And as those very powerful Gods, etc., wi
ll decide to come to him repeatedly, that devotee of the perfection of wisdom will gain an abundance of serene faith.Thi
s is another quality which that son or daughter of a good family will acquire just here and now.Further on, one should n
ot form any unclean or impure habits within the circumference of that abode of the guide to Dharma; otherwise one’s deep
respect for it would remain incomplete.

Moreover, the devotee of the perfection of wisdom will not be fatigued in either body or mind.At ease he lies down, at ea
se he walks about. In his sleep he will see no evil dreams. When he sees anything in his dreams, (91) he will just see t
he Tathagatas, or Stupas, or Bodhisattvas, or Disciples of the Tathagata.When he hears sounds, he will hear the sound of
the perfections and of the wings to enlightenment. He will just see the trees of enlightenment; and underneath them the
Tathagatas, while they wake up to full enlightenment.And likewise he will see how the fully Enlightened turn the wheel 
of dharma. And many Bodhisattvas he will see, chanting just this perfection of wisdom, delighted by its chorus, which pr
oclaims how all-knowledge should be gained, how the Buddha-field should be purified. He is shown the skill in means.He h
ears the sublime sound of the full enlightenment of the Buddhas, the Lords: ‘In this direction, in this part of the worl
d, in this world system, under this name, a Tathagata demonstrates the dharma, surrounded and accompanied by many thousa
nds of Bodhisattvas and Disciples, nay by many hundreds of thousands of niyutas of kotis of Bodhisattvas and Disciples.’
When he has such dreams, he will sleep at ease, he will wake up at ease. Even when food is thrown into it, his body will
still feel at ease, and exceedingly light.No trend of thought will arise in him from excessive eagerness for food.He wi
ll take only a mild interest in food.(92) A devotee of the perfection of wisdom has no strong desire for food, and only 
a mild interest in it, even as a monk, who practices Yoga, and who has emerged from trance, - because his thoughts overf
low with other interests.For to the extent that he has given himself up to devotion to the development of the perfection
of wisdom, to that extent heavenly beings will provide him with heavenly food.These qualities also does one acquire eve
n here and now.

But again, Kausika, if someone has made a copy of the perfection of wisdom, and worships it, but does not learn, study an
d repeat it;and if someone else truly believes in the perfection of wisdom, trustingly confides in it, and, resolutely i
ntent on it, serene in his faith, his thoughts raised to enlightenment, in earnest intent, hears it, learns it, bears it
in mind, recites and studies it, spreads, demonstrates, explains, expounds and repeats it, illuminates it in detail for
others, uncovers its meaning, investigates it with his mind, and, using his wisdom to the fullest, thoroughly examines 
it; copies it, and preserves and stores away the copy, so that the good dharma might last long, so that the guide of the
Tathagatas might not be annihilated, so that the good dharma might not disappear,so that the Bodhisattvas, the great be
ings, might continue to be assisted, since their guide will not fail,- and finally, honours and worships this perfection
of wisdom; then the latter begets the greater merit.(93) He should be imitated by those who want to acquire these disti
nguished qualities here and now, and they should truly believe in the perfection of wisdom, etc., to: because their guid
e will not fail.He will resolve to share it with those who desire it. So the great eye of the Guide of the Buddhas will 
not fail, either for him, or for others who are in quest of virtue.In addition the perfection of wisdom should at all ti
mes be honoured and worshipped.

Chapter IV The proclamation of qualities

