2. How to stand in emptiness, or the perfection of wisdomSubhuti then said to Sakra: Now, Kausika, listen and attend well
. I will teach you how a Bodhisattva should stand in perfect wisdom.Through standing in emptiness should he stand in per
fect wisdom.(35) Armed with the great armour, the Bodhisattva should so develop that he does not take his stand on any o
f these:not on form, feeling, perception, impulses, consciousness;not on eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind; not on form
s, sounds, smells, tastes, touchables, mind-objects; not on eye-consciousness, etc., until we come to; not on mind-consc
iouness, etc.,until we come to: not on the elements, i.e., earth, water, fire, wind, ether, consciousness:not on the pil
lars of mindfulness,right efforts, roads to psychic power, faculties, powers, limbs of enlightenment, limbs of the Path;
not on the fruits of Streamwinner, Once-Returner, Never-Returner, or Arhatship; not on Pratyekabuddhahood, nor on Buddha
hood.He should not take his stand on the idea that ‘this is form,’ ‘this is feeling,’ etc., to: ‘this is Buddhahood.’He 
should not take his stand on the ideas that ‘form, etc., is permanent, [or] impermanent’;See the previous recordSee the 
previous record(36) that ‘form is ease or ill’;that ‘form is the self, or not the self,’that ‘form is lovely or repulsiv
e,’that ‘form is empty, or apprehended as something.’See the previous recordHe should not take his stand on the notion t
hat the fruits of the holy life derive their dignity from the Unconditioned.Or that a Streamwinner is worthy of gifts,an
d will be reborn seven times at the most.Or that a Once-Returner is worthy of gifts,and will, as he has not yet quite wo
n through to the end, make an end of ill after he has once more come into this world.Or that a Never-Returner is worthy 
of gifts, and will, without once more returning to this world, win Nirvana elsewhere.Or that an Arhat is worthy of gifts
,and will just here in this very existence win Nirvana in the realm of Nirvana that leaves nothing behind.Or that a Prat
yekabuddha is worthy of gifts,and will win Nirvana after rising above the level of a Disciple, but without having attain
ed the level of a Buddha.That a Buddha is worthy of gifts,and will win Nirvana in the Buddha-Nirvana, in the realm of Ni
rvana that leaves nothing behind, after he has risen above the levels of a common man, of a Disciple, and of a Pratyekab
uddha, wrought the weal of countless beings, led to Nirvana countless hundreds of thousands of niyutas of kotis of being
s, assured countless beings (37) of Discipleship, Pratyekabuddhahood and full Buddhahood, stood on the stage of a Buddha
and done a Buddha’s work, - even thereon a Bodhisattva should not take his stand.

Thereupon the Venerable Sariputra thought to himself: If even thereon one should not take one’s stand, how then should on
e stand, and train oneself? The Venerable Subhuti, through the Buddha’s might, read his thoughts and said: What do you t
hink, Sariputra, where did the Tathagata stand? Sariputra: Nowhere did the Tathagata stand,because his mind sought no su
pport.He stood neither in what is conditioned, nor in what is unconditioned, nor did he emerge from them.

Subhuti: Even so should a Bodhisattva stand and train himself. He should decide that ‘as the Tathagata does not stand any
where, nor not stand, (38) nor stand apart, nor not stand apart, so will I stand.’ Just so should he train himself ‘as t
he Tathagata is stationed, so will I stand, and train myself.’ Just so should he train himself.‘As the Tathagata is stat
ioned, so will I stand, well placed because without a place to stand on.’ Even so should a Bodhisattva stand and train h
imself.When he trains thus, he adjusts himself to perfect wisdom, and will never cease from taking it to heart.

