1. Tathagata-suchnessSubhuti: As the non-observation of all dharmas, to be sure, is this dharma taught.Nowhere is this dh
arma obstructed.Through its identity with space this dharma is, to be sure, marked with non-obstruction, since no traces
of it are noticed.It has no counterpart, because it is without a second.It has no opponent, because it has gone beyond 
all opposites.It is without a trace, because it has not been caused to become.It is unproduced, because there is no occa
sion for rebirth.It is pathless, because no path is noticed.

Sakra and the Gods: Born after the image of the Lord is this Disciple, the holy Subhuti, the Elder.For, whichever dharma 
he demonstrates, he always starts from emptiness.

(307) Subhuti:Because he is not born, is Subhuti, the Elder, born after the image of the Tathagata.He is born after the i
mage of the Tathagata’s Suchness.As that has neither come nor gone, so also the Suchness of Subhuti has neither come nor
gone.From the very beginning Subhuti the Elder has been born after the image of the Tathagata’s Suchness.Because the Su
chness of the Tathagata and the Suchness of all dharmas are the same thing,and they are both the Suchness of Subhuti the
Elder.Born after the image of that Suchness is Subhuti the Elder;hence born after the image of the Tathagata.But that S
uchness is also no Suchness,and after the image of that Suchness has he been born.It is in that sense that the Elder Sub
huti is born after the image of the Tathagata,and that as a result of the established order of the Suchness of the Tatha
gata.Subhuti’s Suchness is immutable and unchangeable, undiscriminated and undifferentiated, just as the Suchness of the
Tathagata.It is thus that Subhuti the Elder, immutable, unchangeable, undiscriminated, undifferentiated, through that S
uchness, is born after the image of the Tathagata.And just as the Suchness of the Tathagata, which is immutable and undi
fferentiated, is nowhere obstructed, so also the Suchness of all dharmas, which is also immutable and undifferentiated.F
or the Suchness of the Tathagata, and the Suchness of all dharmas, they are both one single Suchness, not two, not divid
ed.A non-dual Suchness, however, is nowhere, is from nowhere, belongs to nowhere.It is because it is a Suchness which be
longs nowhere that it is non-dual.It is therefore through an unmade Suchness that the Elder Subhuti is born after the im
age of the Tathagata.An unmade Suchness, however, is at no time not Suchness(308) and therefore it is non-dual.It is in 
this sense that the Elder Subhuti is born after the image of the Tathagata.Just as the Suchness of the Tathagata is undi
scriminated and undifferentiated, at all times and in all dharmas, so also the Suchness of Subhuti.And for that reason, 
although we seem to have a duality when Subhuti has been conjured up from the Suchness of the Tathagata, nevertheless no
thing real has been lopped off that Suchness, which remains unbroken, because one cannot apprehend an actually real agen
t that could break it apart.In that sense is Subhuti the Elder born after the image of the Tathagata.As the Suchness of 
the Tathagata is not outside the Suchness of all dharmas, so also the Suchness of Subhuti.But what is not outside the Su
chness of all dharmas, that is not of anything not the Suchness.The Suchness of Subhuti is therefore just the same as th
e Suchness of all dharmas.Subhuti the Elder has undergone the experience of that Suchness by imitating in himself the un
altered Suchness,but in actual fact no one has anywhere undergone a process of imitation.It is in this sense that Subhut
i the Elder is born after the image of the Tathagata.As the Suchness of the Tathagata is neither past, nor future, nor p
resent, so also the Suchness of all dharmas.As born in the image of that Suchness is Subhuti called “born after the imag
e of the Tathagata.”Because it is also through the Suchness of the Tathagata [and not only his own] that he has conforme
d to Suchness. It is just through the Suchness of the Tathagata that he has conformed to past Suchness,and it is just th
rough past Suchness that he has conformed to the Suchness of the Tathagata.And so with the future and the present.It is 
through the Suchness of the Tathagata that he has conformed to past, future and present Suchness,and it is through past,
future and present Suchness that he has conformed to the Suchness of the Tathagata.In this sense the Suchness of Subhut
i, and past, future and present Suchness, and the Suchness of the Tathagata, are not two, nor divided.The Suchness of al
l dharmas and the Suchness of Subhuti are therefore not two, nor divided.(309) And also, the Suchness of the Lord when h
e was a Bodhisattva that is the Suchness of the Lord when he had won full enlightenment.And that is the Suchness through
which a Bodhisattva, when he has definitely won full enlightenment, comes to be called a ‘Tathagata.’

