1. The bodhisattvaâ€™s courage in difficultiesSariputra: In the core and substance of things verily courses a Bodhisattva w
ho courses in perfect wisdom!Subhuti: In something unsubstantial verily courses a Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wis
dom.

Thereupon this occurred to many thousands of Gods of the realm of sense-desire: Homage is due to those beings who raise t
heir thoughts to, and who consummate their thoughts in full enlightenment,who course in this deep perfection of wisdom, 
and who, when they course thus, do not realize the reality-limit, be it on the level of a Disciple or that of a Pratyeka
buddha.In this way also should the Bodhisattvas be known as doers of what is hard, when they course in the true nature o
f dharma, but do not realize it.Subhuti read their thoughts, and said to them: Not that is hard for those Bodhisattvas t
hat they do not realize the reality-limit.This, however, is hard for them, this is most hard for them, (445) that they p
ut on the armour of the resolution to lead countless beings to Nirvana,when absolutely those beings do not exist. And si
nce they do not exist, they cannot be got at. Owing to the isolatedness of beings,those who should be disciplined do thu
s absolutely not exist.It is in this spirit that the Bodhisattvas have set out for full enlightenment, and have decided 
to discipline beings. One would decide to discipline space if one were to decide to discipline beings.For the isolatedne
ss of beings should be known after the pattern of the isolatedness of space.In this way also Bodhisattvas are doers of w
hat is hard, when they put on the armour for the sake of beings who do not exist, who cannot be got at.One would decide 
to put on space if one were to decide to put on the armour for the sake of beings.And yet this armour has been put on by
the Bodhisattvas for the sake of beings.But that non-apprehension of beings, in [ultimate end] absolute reality, has be
en taught by the Tathagata.And this non-apprehension of beings can be inferred from their isolatedness, and from the iso
latedness of those who should be disciplined should the isolatedness of a Bodhi-being be inferred.If a Bodhisattva, when
this is being taught, does not lose heart, then one should know that he courses in the perfection of wisdom.For from th
e isolatedness of a being should be known the isolatedness of form, etc., and of all dharmas.(446) Thus should the isola
tedness of all dharmas be viewed.When the isolatedness of all dharmas is thus being taught, a Bodhisattva does not lose 
heart,and because of that he courses in the perfection of wisdom.

The Lord: For what reason does a Bodhisattva not lose heart when the isolatedness of all dharmas is thus being taught? Su
bhuti: Because of isolatedness no dharma can ever lose heart.For one cannot get at any dharma that would lose heart,nor 
at any dharma that would make a dharma lose heart.The Lord: So it is, Subhuti.It is quite certain that a Bodhisattva cou
rses in perfect wisdom if, when this is being taught, demonstrated, expounded and pointed out, he does not lose heart, i
s not cast down or depressed, does not become cowed or stolid, does not turn his mind away from it, does not have his ba
ck broken, and remains unafraid.

