2. AttachmentsThe Lord: Well said, Subhuti.For also names and signs are sources of attachment.Subhuti: It is wonderful, O
Lord, to see the extent to which this perfection of wisdom has been well taught, well explained, well rounded off. The 
Lord even announces these sources of attachment.Sariputra: Which, Subhuti, are these attachments? Subhuti: It is an atta
chment if one perceives that the skandhas are empty,that past dharmas are past dharmas,future dharmas are future dharmas
,and present dharmas are present dharmas.It is an attachment if one forms the notion that someone who belongs to the veh
icle of the Bodhisattvas begets so great a heap of merit through his first production of the thought of enlightenment.Sa
kra: In which manner, Subhuti, does the thought of enlightenment become a source of attachment? Subhuti: One becomes att
ached when one perceives this thought of enlightenment as ‘this is the first thought of enlightenment,’ and if one conve
rts it into full enlightenment while conscious that one does so.For it is quite impossible to turn over the essential or
iginal nature of a thought.One should therefore keep in agreement with true reality when one makes others see the highes
t, and rouses them to win supreme enlightenment.(191) In that way one does not waste one’s self away, and the manner in 
which one rouses others to win the highest has the sanction of the Buddhas.And one succeeds in abandoning all those poin
ts of attachment.

The Lord: Well said, Subhuti, you who make the Bodhisattvas aware of these points of attachment.I will now announce other
, more subtle, attachments. Listen to them well, and pay good attention.I will teach them to you.“Well said, O Lord,” an
d the Venerable Subhuti listened in silence.

The Lord: Here Subhuti, a son or daughter of good family, full of faith, attends to the Tathagata through a sign.But, so 
many signs, so many attachments.For from signs comes attachment.It is thus that he is conscious that he rejoices in all 
the dharmas without outflows of the Buddhas and Lords, past, future and present, and that, after rejoicing, he turns ove
r into full enlightenment the wholesome root which is associated with his act of jubilation.As a matter of fact, however
, the true nature of dharmas is not past, nor future, nor present;it lies quite outside the three periods of time;and fo
r that reason it cannot possibly be converted, cannot be treated as a sign, or as an objective support,and it cannot be 
seen, nor heard, nor felt, nor known. (192,1)

