2. Sadaprarudita’s self-sacrificeThe Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita then had a supreme, a most sublime feeling of zest and joy
: “It is a gain to me, a very great gain that, by asking for the perfection of wisdom and for this disquisition, I have 
wrought the weal of so many beings.(518) That alone should bring me merit sufficient for the accomplishment of full enli
ghtenment.Unquestionably I shall become a Tathagata.”In his zest and joy he rose seven palm trees high into the air, and
, standing at the height of seven palm trees, he reflected: “How can I, standing here in the air, do honour to the Bodhi
sattva Dharmodgata?” Sakra, Chief of Gods, saw him, read his thoughts, presented him with heavenly Mandarava flowers, an
d said to him: “Honour the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata with these heavenly flowers!For we feel that we should honour the man
who helped you.Today your might has wrought the weal of many thousands of living beings.Rare are the beings who, like y
ou, have the strength, for the sake of all beings through countless aeons to bear the great burden.”

The Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita then took the Mandarava flowers from Sakra, Chief of Gods, and scattered them over the Bodh
isattva Dharmodgata.He presented the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata with his own body,and said to him: “I give you myself as a 
present, and I shall be your attendant and servant from today onwards.”And with folded hands he stood before Dharmodgata
.

(519) The merchant’s daughter and her five hundred maidens then said to the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita: “We in our turn ma
ke a present of ourselves to you, son of good family. Through this wholesome root we also shall become recipients of jus
t those dharmas, and together with you we shall again and again honour and revere the Buddhas and Lords,and the Bodhisat
tvas, and we shall remain near to you.”Sadaprarudita replied: “If you, maidens, in imitation of my own earnest intention
, give yourselves with earnest intentions to me, then I will accept you.”The maidens replied: “We imitate you, and with 
earnest resolutionwe give ourselves as presents to you, to do with us as you will.”Thereupon the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudi
ta presented the merchant’s daughter and her five hundred maidens, embellished and adorned, together with their five hun
dred well-decorated carriages, to the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata, and said: “All these I present to you as attendants and s
ervants, and also the carriages for your own use.”

Sakra, Chief of Gods, applauded him and said: “Well done, son of good family!A Bodhisattva must renounce all his property
.Through that thought of renunciation he soon wins full enlightenment,and the worship he pays thus to the preachers of d
harma enables him to hear about the perfection of wisdom and skill in means.(520) Also in the past the Tathagatas, when 
they still were Bodhisattvas, have, by the fact that they renounced everything, procured a claim to full enlightenment; 
and they also have asked questions about perfect wisdom and about skill in means.”

The Bodhisattva Dharmodgata accepted Sadaprarudita’s gift, so that his wholesome root might reach fulfilment.Immediately 
afterwards he returned it to Sadaprarudita.After that, the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata went into his house. The sun was abou
t to set.

The Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita then thought to himself: “It would not indeed be seemly for me, who have come here out of l
ove for dharma, to sit or to lie down.I will remain either standing or walking, until the time when the Bodhisattva Dhar
modgata shall again come out of his house, in order to reveal dharma to us.”

The Bodhisattva Dharmodgata then remained for seven years immersed in one uninterrupted state of trance,and he dwelt in c
ountless thousands of concentrations, peculiar to Bodhisattvas, issued from perfection of wisdom and skill in means.For 
seven years Sadaprarudita never adopted any other posture than the two just mentioned, and he did not fall into sloth an
d torpor.For seven years he never felt any preoccupation with sense desires, or with ill will, or with harming others, h
e never felt any eagerness for tastes, nor any self-satisfaction.But he thought: “When then will the Bodhisattva Dharmod
gata emerge from his trance, (521) so that we may spread out a seat for him, whereon he may demonstrate dharma,and so th
at we may sprinkle well the place where he will reveal the perfection of wisdom and skill in means, anoint it well and b
edeck it with manifold flowers?”And the merchant’s daughter with her five hundred maidens followed his example, passed t
heir time in two postures only, and imitated all his works.

One day the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita heard a heavenly voice which said: “On the seventh day from today the Bodhisattva D
harmodgata will emerge from his trance, and he will then, seated in the center of the town, demonstrate dharma.”When Sad
aprarudita heard the heavenly voice, he was contented, elated, joyous, overjoyed and jubilant. Together with the merchan
t’s daughter and her five hundred maidens he cleansed the ground, spread out the seat made of the seven precious things,
took off his upper garment, and spread it on top of the seat.The maidens also took off their upper garments, spread the
ir five hundred upper garments on that seat, and thought: “Seated on that seat will the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata demonstr
ate dharma.” (522,1)And they also were contented, elated, joyous, overjoyed and jubilant.

When the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita wanted to sprinkle the groundhe could not find any water, though he searched all round
.For Mara, the Evil One, had hidden all the water. And he did this so that Sadaprarudita, if he could not find any water
, should become depressed and sad, or change his mind, with the result that his wholesome root would vanish, or the ferv
our of this worship be dimmed.

The Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita then thought to himself: “Let me pierce my own body, and sprinkle the ground with my blood.
The ground is full of rising dust,and I fear that some of it may fall on the body of the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.What el
se can I do with this body which is of necessity doomed to break up? Better surely that this my body should be destroyed
by such an action rather than by an ineffectual one.For the sake of sense pleasures, as a result of sense pleasures man
y thousands frames of mine have again and again, while I wandered in birth-and-death, been broken up, but never in condi
tions as favourable as these, never for the sake of gaining the good law.If they must once more be broken up, let them i
n any case be broken up in a holy cause.”He (523) then took a sharp sword, pierced his body on every side, and everywher
e sprinkled that piece of ground with his own blood.The merchant’s daughter with her five hundred maidens followed his e
xample, and did as he did.But there was no alteration of thought in either the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita, or in all thos
e maidens, which would have given Mara, the Evil One, a chance of entering in order to obstruct their wholesome roots.

Sakra, Chief of Gods, then thought to himself: “It is wonderful how much this Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita loves dharma, how
firm is his sense of obligation, how great the armour he has put on, and how he disregards his body, his life, and his 
pleasures, and how resolutely he has set out with the goal of knowing full enlightenment,in his desire to ‘set free all 
beings from the measureless sufferings of birth-and-death, after he has known full enlightenment.”Sakra then changed by 
magic all that blood into heavenly sandalwood water. And all round that piece of ground, for one hundred leagues, an inc
onceivably sublime scent, the scent of that heavenly sandalwood water, filled the air.

And Sakra said to Sadaprarudita: “Well done, son of good family!I applaud your inconceivable vigour, your supreme love an
d search for dharma.The Tathagatas in the past (524) also have procured the right to full enlightenment through this kin
d of earnest intention, vigour, and love for dharma.”

The Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita then thought to himself: “I have spread out the seat for the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata,and I 
have well swept and sprinkled this piece of ground.Now I must still get flowers with which to cover this piece of ground
, and to scatter over the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata when he demonstrates dharma.” Sakra then said to Sadaprarudita: “Accep
t these heavenly Mandarava flowersfor that twofold purpose!”And he presented him with a thousand heavenly Khara measures
of heavenly flowers.And the Bodhisattva Sadaprarudita accepted those flowers, and used some of them to cover the piece 
of ground, and, later on, he strewed others over the Bodhisattva Dharmodgata.

